I have the pleasure and honor of interviewing
Colonel Fred Dollar today. It's Groundhog Day,
2nd of February, 1999, and we're in the conference
room in the Evans Library.
Colonel Dollar, to start with, for the sake of
those who may listen or read this in years to come,
give us a brief biographical summary of your life
until you came here to A&M to work. We'll do another
one on your student days here. But where did you
grow up, and when were you here, and what did you do
after you left campus before you came back? I grew
up near Henderson, Texas. I was born on a farm or
ranch combination where I learned some hard work
and honesty and the things that families used to be
taught. And did well through high school, got
interested in debate. It was an old town, old
country, but when the Beast Texas Oil Field came
in, that changed the whole complexion. So that
gave us a little ambition to spread out. So I came
down here to school in 1940. I had a scholarship at
Baylor, but I didn't go there because I had hay
fever so badly. and i guess this is the worst place i
could come to but i did at any rate so i came down here
worked and left before i could finish because of we
were we were inducted into the army in 1943 but i had
enough grade points so that when i got my
commission i completed my number of hours so they
sent me my diploma in 1946 so i served in the
military until 1965. Various parts of the world,
regular U.S. Army, where I learned quite a few
things. A lot of them I did not want to learn, but I
did. And so that's the sum total of what happened
before I came. Alright, so you got out of the Army in
1965. To come here. And how did you and A&M get
together then? Well, I had worked This has nothing
to do with that immediately, but I had worked in the
dining halls for Cliff Hotard when I was a student.
Oh, yes. Well, in about 1964, I wrote a letter to one
of the trade magazines in which I mentioned Texas
A&M University. in the sense that they had an
article on the Navy food service. So I said, Texas
A&M's usually about 20 years ahead of the Navy. Why
don't you do an article on Texas A&M? Well, I had met
Earl Rudder, so I put a little note on a copy, and I
just said on the note, you might get a kick out of
this. Well, I was about ready to return to the
continent of the United States, in 1965, and I had a
letter from Clark Monroe who said, President
Rudder brought me a letter from you, and he
wondered if you might be interested in a job at this
institution. He said, would you come and take a
look at it? So I told my wife, I'll go just for fun, it
won't amount to anything. I did. I went back and
told her virtually the same thing. But then I had a
telegram, in essence, to come quickly as you can.
So I retired and came here. It was about, oh, I
realized if I got any older, I'd have difficulty
finding something anyway. So that was after 22
years of military service. So I came here in 1965
and worked immediately under Howard Vestal, Over
him was Tom Cherry and then Earl Rudder. And I
believe those were three of the greatest men that I
have ever known. They were just outstanding in
every respect that I have the greatest respect for
them. All right, now let's talk about those three
men because that's one of the clear important
points. First, let's back up. When you came to
visit the campus that first time with the
possibility, What did you, where did they take
you? Who did you meet with? Well, I just really met
with those three people. And I stayed, spent the
night in the Memorial Student Center and talked at
length with the dinner that night and with Howard
and Clark Monroe and their wives. And that was
about it after we surveyed everything. I didn't
really look at any food facilities, because
actually they were exactly the same as they were
when I left here. And had I known how dilapidated
they were, I might not have come. But I had been
hoping to return to this part of the country, but
never thought about coming here. did they during
this visit did they sit you down and interrogate
you was there a oh no no they had looked into my
background i found out later through the
association of former students uh because they
they knew people people here knew people there who
knew me there so they they corresponded with them a
little bit to find out what kind of person i might be
here Now, Clark was the Director of Personnel.
Personnel. And then Howard was... He called it
Auxiliary Services then, and later Business
Services. And then Mr. Cherry was the Vice
President... President for Business Affairs,
which included the Fiscal Affairs. And then Mr.
Rutter was President. Describe, make believe
someone hadn't ever seen Howard. describe him
physically and then describe him in terms of his
way of getting things done? Well, he was a very
intelligent man, very cordial. And he told me, he
said, I've been here only a month. And actually, I
was the first person he ever hired. And he said, he
told me that many times, but he's just a cordial,
outgoing, open individual. And he didn't know a
lot of things about the school particularly. One
time he told me, he said, you know, I regret I'm not
an Aggie. I said, Howard, you were a better Aggie
the day you got here than a lot of people will ever
be, which was true. And so it was just a casual,
informal meeting. I think President Rudder made
so many decisions, and I think he really made the
decision because we went down to interview
President Rudder all the time. Describe that.
Well, we went in to see him, and he was always
outgoing, very friendly. We had a little
conversation about the military and just a little
bit about the school. And he says, well, I wonder
how hard you work. I said, President Rudder, my
middle name is work. And beyond that, it was just a
small talk. And that was the whole conversation
then. There was no question about any technical
information I had. I mentioned a little
experiences, I believe, to Howard, but beyond
that, we didn't talk about that either. It was just
a fact I think that I already talked to people and
knew some of the jobs I'd been in, and President
Rutter was very prone to hire military people,
apparently, which I didn't know when I came here.
But then I learned that so many around were
following him. I never would have guessed that.
His office was then down in what we... In the
system, old system. The one right... Right. Now
the Williams building. Yes. Let's see. He didn't
claim to be highly informed about food service.
No, no, no, no, no, he didn't. And they didn't know
of any changes that one had made. It was just wanted
somebody to come and do the job. Why was the job
vacant? Frank Nugent had been food director here
for a short time, probably the shortest tenure
anyone ever had in that job. And he had left shortly
before that. Later on, I told Mr. Cherry, I said,
you didn't necessarily need me, but you needed
somebody immediately. And I think that might have
been part of it. Did they offer you a salary and you
accept, or was there some? No, that's very
interesting. They offered me a salary, and I said,
well, I would like to come for that, but I can't.
because I said I have some obligations, including
some sick children at the time, and I said I must
meet those expenses, and I said otherwise I'd be
delighted to come. And then we left it like that.
That's one of the reasons I told my wife when I
returned, I said we can just forget it and enjoy the
trip. But they decided to give me whatever I said I
needed, A hired vessel later on said, you're
making more than I am. Of course, I'm sure that
didn't last very long. All right, so you arrived
then and began August 10, 1965. 1965, all right.
And describe the responsibilities and
facilities for which you were responsible. Well,
I had just about total responsibility about as
much as you can get for anything because Howard
didn't believe in real close supervision, and
neither did Mr. Cherry. So the facilities I had
were Sabiza Hall, Duncan Hall, Memorial Student
Center Food Services, Hotard Hall, believe it or
not, Hotard Hall was not Hotard Hall then. It was a
hall behind the post office, that is the campus
post office, where we kept laborers who wanted to
live there alone. We had many that had come in from
various places, and some had been there for years,
some who were single. Then we had a facility, Bryan
Field, that small group, And beyond that, we had in
the summertime a training camp at Junction, which
is now Texas Tech property, arranged by one of our
previous governors. And that was it. It was very
limited. There were no snack bars like there are
now. And the MSC had to serve as both snack bar and
formal dining. A very restricted facility, by the
way, compared to what we now have. and what we later
built. About how many employees? Oh, we had, I
started with about 600, and well, that was the
summertime. We wound up with, or late, we wound up a
little later with 800 employees. Of course, in the
summer, one of the things that makes this job
different from others as director of food
services is that you have a tremendous group in the
fall and main year you need. Then you must drop down
to tremendous loads. And that's the reason when
you budget, you must budget for about 170% more
than your average sometimes because they have to
be there when you need them and reduced when you
don't need them. As you began, who were your key
subordinates? Describe who they were and what
they did. Well, we had some old-time chefs who had
been here for, one of them I worked with in Sebiza, I
had worked with when I was a student. Now, I worked
really Under him, in an indirect way, Hoketard
said I was his employee, but this was Mr. Willie
Yeager, who's one of the world's greatest people,
I guess. And he was a ball of fire, had been there for
years. So we had him, and we had Mr. Plant and Duncan
Hall, who had been here for years. And then we had
hired Frank Nugent had started this just prior to
my arrival, managers of the dining halls, which
were called Miss Halls then. And they were Army
sergeants. One fellow had come out of the Navy, but
had quite a bit of knowledge of food and somewhat
more formal dining affairs. than our old time
chefs had here. And then we had a manager at the
Memorial Student Center. But they were all, all
those people were fine people, but they were not
really what we needed to grow with, not because
they were incapable, they just had not been over
that hurdle previously. for the big affairs that
you and others have witnessed here at a and which we
built a lot of our pr later on because you arrived at
about the time the growth in the enrollment was
beginning just before it took off i suppose and uh
we we later on had some what what we tried to do was to
make a public relations affair out of everything
we had at the Memorial Student Center. Now, we had a
long time and a hard time getting into this because
to hire people at very low salaries a lot of times,
it was very difficult. I had some notes here to tell
you one of the occasions we had that I'll never
forget. We had two long 60-foot buffet tables.
that was shrub trees and decorations of every
type. This was one of the president's buffets,
which you have attended many times. And Governor
Clements came in and he,
one of the board members introduced him to me and he
came in and we shook hands when he entered. And he
came in and he looked at that food display with
those two 60-foot lines and all the things on it and
the aroma coming off. And he grinned from ear to ear
and he said, let me shake your hand again. Well,
that was what we were trying to develop. And in a
sense, that happened many times because on every
occasion of those things, we not only had that
mapped out down to the minute and the item and the
people and everything, But we'd have a meeting
after each one of those affairs to critique it and
see, well, what could we do to make this
president's buffet greater than it was the last
time? On one occasion, Howard Bessel said to me,
what did you serve? I said, Howard, we served
everything we could think of. He said, that's
great. Because he wanted us to do everything we
could do. In other words, he wanted... And I
wanted, as you and others wanted, to be the best at
everything we did. Well, if you try hard enough,
sometimes you will. Now, there must have been some
great successes, meals, some big meals that you
remember. What were some of the biggest ones that
you can recall in terms of the crowd and the
success? Well, some of the biggest ones were just
small affairs. I don't mean small in numbers, but
not with great importance attached to them like
the 4-H Club. We fed those people. That was one of
the things that was an outstanding
accomplishment, I think, We filled Cebiza
upstairs and downstairs with about 4,000 people
in a very short time. And to feed that many in a short
time was unheard of in many places. What would have
been the menu? Well, for that number, we had a We had
one item which was chicken on that occasion with
the vegetables and dessert and the salad and such.
But what we did was a system that was later put into
dunking. This is where the idea came from for that
arrangement that's there now. Where they passed
down this, we were assembling plates as fast as
they could walk. So we were able to serve that
number And about the time it would take you to go
down a cafeteria line over here in one of the
commercial cafeterias. And this is a system we use
in developing the Dunkin' Dining Center, which is
now a center that can be used continuously if it
needs to be with thousands of people for
self-service with not only with one item, it has a
variety of menu items that can be served. We
developed three different systems here, really,
for the first time. And we had a lot of firsts, not
because we were trying to get firsts, but it just
developed that way. When we renovated Sbiza
Dining Center, we had the first comprehensive
fast food in conjunction with a regular menu that
had ever been offered in the United States. About
when was that? That was in 1976. and
it wasn't completed until 77. And there we had
where you walk up and get the hot pizza, the
hamburgers, and the other fast foods. And the
first The first time we offered, we'd offer those
items one at a time, and it'd be such a shock to
students that line up out the door. First time
they'd ever been served hot pizza anywhere,
because that just couldn't be done for student
dining. Same way with hamburgers. They were
coming right off the line, and it worked quite
well. Then when we opened Commons Dining, down
where we have Kruger, Dunn, Moser, Astin, We
developed there what we called an accordion
style. And we did it by necessity, not to be smart or
outstanding or anything. It was just something we
had to do. We divided a long cafeteria line that
would have been long into several sections with
duplicate meats. and vegetables so that we
duplicated everything in just a few feet and put
little bars about an inch high so that people
couldn't slide their trays that got off the beat.
And we could serve in a line that would only serve
one person, we could serve five people at a time.
And it was amazing how fast that went. And then the
third thing, we call that the accordion style.
Then in Duncan Dining Center, we developed this
concept of having all of the salads and the
beverages outside where people could pick them up
as they came in, that is the customer. And then a
variety of foods at different stations they could
see and go directly to and take whatever they
wanted and then go back for all they wanted when
they finished that. And for lack of a better name,
we called that plate ready because we were
assembling the plates as they came along so the
Corps can eat rapidly in great numbers. And that's
the first time that we had that for the Corps
because this school, when I came here, was all
family-style service. And the military
academies are still family-style service. Now,
we had people from all over the United States to
come look at the facilities and those dining
arrangements. And the Army used those as some of
their examples in improving their new designs for
their dining facilities. Now, I don't think they
did a good job of it, but their consultants came and
looked at those, and they came back the second
time, and they paid us a great compliment. In fact,
they mentioned us in some of their publications,
but they said, we find problems other places. We
find solutions here. Well, that might not be
entirely true, but it's nice to hear sometimes.
Where did you turn... as you were trying to bring
about these changes and advancements, where did
you turn for ideas, advice, counsel? Well, I had
studied a lot of this in the military because I'd
been in supply work primarily, purchasing,
storage, supply, transportation of food. I'd
been in charge of this in Korea and the Far East. So I
had seen that, and I knew that was not what we
wanted. So I started looking at all the
outstanding commercial places and institutions
that I could identify to get ideas where I could put
them together. And from that, from what I already
knew, we came up with these different things.
Where did you get some of the good ideas? Can you
name some specific? Well, I think University of
Tennessee. I used to say I'd steal these ideas. And
I'd steal them from almost everywhere. From SMU, I
stole an idea or two. From the Humble Building in
Houston.
And almost any place I'd go, I'd try to find
something that I could use, some little
something. And it worked pretty well. I think it
worked today, really, because you never do reach
perfection in this or anything else, in most
cases. Now, you were in charge from 65 till? To 87.
87, right. When you started out, you said six to
seven hundred employees. What was it when you
retired? Well, we had gotten up to...
It seems like we'd gotten about 8,000, but my
numbers might be a little bit off. All right, and
then do you remember what the annual budget was?
Yes, when I retired, it was probably about close to
five million. Do you remember what it was when you
started? No, but I knew it had been quite a long,
probably maybe a third, not even a third of that, I
think. When you started, the workforce was made up
of men, women, black, white? Mostly men. Very few
women. A mixture of black, white, and Spanish. And
one of the amazing things that was originally
needed, what was then, what is now Hookard Hall,
was that we'd solicit often in order to get people
to work. We would solicit people in South Texas
with the radio stations would do this free for us,
public relations on their part. So we'd hire
people, and we might have hired many wetbacks. I
don't know. But we had everybody that would come.
We would hire them. And a lot of them wouldn't stay
but a week or two, and that was a very difficult
thing. We were paying so little, it was
ridiculous. Do you remember what the pay was then?
Well, I remember, I believe one of my outstanding
cooks made 86 cents an hour. And that was a
commitment for 13 hours a day because it was a split
shift. And that is where, for anyone that wouldn't
know, where you come in early in the morning, you
work until the afternoon, then you get a break for
two or three hours, then you're back working in the
evening until the work is finished. And some of
those poor fellows never saw all their homes, I
think, in the daylight, except in the summertime.
and sometimes on the weekend, and they were paid on
a basis of an eight-hour shift for that 13, 14-hour
obligation. One of the comical things that I think
about often is that one day when it became obvious
that we were the only ones still trying to do this,
or one of the few, I said, we're going to change
this. We're going to have two shifts every day.
Some of the old-timers said it won't work. I said,
well, it works everywhere else seemed like. They
said, yes, but it won't work here. And so can you
imagine what trouble we would have been in with the
government if we had tried to continue a split
shift? It was terrible. Well, the beautiful thing
about all this was that people like Howard Vestal
and Tom Cherry We're just 100% behind everything I
did. One of the greatest things I read happened to
me one day before we started most of this building
program. Hired a best with Ken Burnett and said,
well, he said, I want you to know, Mr. Chair and I
have talked, we want you to build anything you
need. Well, that was music to my ears. Now, we made
our own money, and a lot of people didn't know that.
They thought we got money from the state somewhere
else but we generated our own money but but we had to
get once it came in it was under school state
control so we had to get permission and spend it so
we we were woefully low on salaries and on monies
for our facilities and to the extent it was it was
almost pathetic well the first thing we started on
was to renovate Subiza, we mentioned before. One
of the few things I've done before that, we had no
color on campus. You'd be surprised at how drought
everything was. There was a little bit of color in
Memorial Student Center, but very little, very
little. A carpet on the rug would have been
forbidden like this one here. It was just, it
couldn't be tolerated. Well, I painted the
entrance of the basement to Subiza chartreuse.
And it looked so conspicuous, I thought I'd
probably be called on the carpet for it. And now
that would be a jubilee, of course. But that's just
how things were. Everything was tan or brick red or
brown. And that was the color scheme. All right,
you get here in 65. What was the first major change
that you undertook? Well, I believe that was a
renovation of Sebesa. I really worked on that 10
years. I'm slow, so I worked on the renovation of
Duncan. The thoughts and the diagrams, that is 10
years. I worked 10 years on Sebesa. I told somebody
once I couldn't do anything less than two years.
Were the food preparation facilities located at
each of the three Sebesa, Duncan, and the MSC, they
prepared their own? You didn't bake it at one place
and take it over there? The only central
production was the bakery at Duncan, and we baked
everything there. There was a rumor for the
students at Duncan over in the Corps that
everything was cooked in Sebesa. Well, I wanted to
have a little fun out of that, so in the basement of
Sebesa, when we did one of the conversions, named
the basement the Underground and then the one
section the Underground Railroad and we built a
caboose and so that I said yes there it is we use this
train from this point to transport the food Well,
you know, I never heard the rumor after that day. It
was so ridiculous. Not even they could. They had to
laugh at it. You mentioned bakery.